# Final-Project

https://final-project-l8kt.onrender.com

In order to build this dashboard, I started by gaining a basic understanding of what a dashboard is and looked into examples of past projects. Through learning UI/UX principles in class along with the coding behind building a dashboard, I gained a solid foundation as to how I was going to tackle this project. 

My first step was to come up with an area of interest, and I immediately thought that music data could be extremely interesting to work with. Because so many people listen to all types of music throughout their days, I figured this dashboard could be interactive to a wide variety of people. The personas I chose to target were casual music listeners and music professionals. With this, I knew making an interactive dashboard could work both angles in giving as much information as the user wanted to interact with. For casual listeners, finding new songs to add to playlists and seeing how their favorite artist's songs vary in popularity seemed like a great option. For professionals, they could gain a higher-level understanding behind the more technical variables such as speechiness or valence and see how that translates into songs to then use in their own work.

With this in mind, I selected a dataset found on HuggingFace by a user named maharshipandya. This user scraped the data of over 125 genres in Spotify and included a variety of useful variables. The data came relatively clean, making my work with it very smooth and efficient. 

I then designed a layout that I thought at the time would be best with my dashboard. I quickly found when building my dashboard that some of these ideas had to be changed due to my skill-level and miscalculating on spacing, but I was able to figure that out along the way.

The next step was to go ahead and build my dashboard. Because this was my first time learning all of these concepts, I found it best to work in sections and focus on building out each component at a time. I ultimately decided on one datatable that allows the user to select a genre to then be shown 5 rows from that genre, hopefully introducing them to a new artist or song. My next component is an interactive scatterplot using radio buttons to choose the x and y axis (each being a numerical variable from the data) and then the user may filter on genre using a dropdown which shows different colors in the graph. My final component is a chained callback for a bar graph that allows the user to select from a list of artists on a dropdown, which then allows them to select multiple of that artist's songs in a dropdown showing popularity on the bar graph (colored by song).

Throughout this process, I learned many data science processes that were introduced to me in class. I really wanted to focus on balance, consistency, and useability within UI components. I used a green color scheme from a bootstrap theme to tie in Spotify colors and allow more eye-friendly buttons. I also implemented the green theme into my graphs to keep consistency and made the backgrounds darker to match the text and color scheme. The balance of the page allows users to want to engage with it and have an aesthetic experience. I made sure to provide clear instruction at each step for the user, while making sure to space out and divide the page in a user-friendly way. 

For UX principles, the interactivity was my main focus to allow the user experience to be inviting and engaging. I felt that music data was a great way to keep user engagement because every person (hopefully) enjoys music in some way, so to be able to interact with that is already an exciting thing. I added a button linking to Spotify to allow users to explore into that a bit more and have it on hand if they use Spotify themselves. The graphs having multiple layers of interactivity also, I believe, really help to pull the user in and keep them scrolling through to find out more about their favorite genres or artists. 

I learned that layout plans may change drastically along the way, and that is okay. I had to be flexible with that in order to allow the users to maximize their experience and I enjoyed learning that process. I found my strengths to be in building each component separately once I got the hang of it, and in the design process I enjoyed spacing and separating my layout to make it user-friendly. In doing this project, I picked up many new skills through callbacks and layouts, and the more I was able to work with my data and get through any errors, the more efficient I became and the project was extremely rewarding because of that. 
